interviewing Dr. Glenn Johnson in the Center for
Teaching Excellence. Dr. Johnson has been at
Texas A&M since 1967, which is a couple of years
before the College of Education actually became a
college. And Dr. Johnson, I would like for you if
you would just kind of think back to the time that
you arrived and the things that have happened and
the changes that have taken place within the
College of Education your arrival, just some of
the highlights. Obviously, that's a big order,
very open-ended. Well, let's see. I came a little
early. They had some funds to bring me in in
mid-August, so I was actually on the job a few
months before the beginning of the year. You came
in in what capacity? Funds for what? Travel,
consulting, and so forth. It was the way in those
days to get new faculty, move, and on the job before
they actually had courses to teach, et cetera. So
you did not have a course at the time? No. What
department were you with originally? At that
time, in August, it was called the Department of
Education and Psychology. And at the end of that
month, that no longer existed. It became the
Department of Education. And the Department of
Psychology opened its doors September 1 of 67. So
during that first year, I was
under the impression that there was going to be
some great growth take place at Texas A&M
University, and particularly in education,
because they had only recently begun to advertise
that it was coeducational. Was that in 68 or 67? 67.
OK. So when we met with our students for the first
time the first week of September, we found out that
at Texas A&M University, there were
approximately 600 girls enrolled. And a large
proportion of them were in the Department of
Education.
Our projections then were that this was probably
going to double annually. because of the
now-released publicity on it. There had been a
tendency not to really banter this. That there
were girls here? Yeah, that there were girls here.
So the word had gotten out in the informal
communication net, and that's why we had 600. But
now they were starting to publicize it with flyers
and bulletins and news releases, etc., And in
retrospect, that held true for several years. It
just seemed like we were doubling our enrollment
every year. So 600 girls, 1,200 girls, 2,400. How
long did that keep up? For years, because I think it
must have been around, you could check someone in
the university, I'll bet around 70, 778, we were
probably at 10,000 girls. That's a guess.
I'll take that. Interesting. Yeah, I think even
that first year I was there in 1967, 68, the
informal communication that was saying that we
were going to become a college of education, that
the growth was so rampant in the demand, so great,
that this would take place. And of course, later we
would find out that President Rutter, who had
hired Frank Hubert to be the dean of the College of
Arts and Sciences,
gave Dean Hubert a choice. Basically said, Frank,
would you like to be Dean of Arts and Sciences as you
are now, or would you like to be the Dean of the new
College of Education when it opens? Did that
comment surprise anybody, that he chose to go to
the Dean of the College of Education? It didn't
surprise me, because I'd heard him talk about
this. He just felt like with all of his experience
in the public schools and being in charge of
certification for the state of Texas at one time
with the Texas Education Agency, that his next
thrust, his next contribution to Texas A&M
University would be in the new College of
Education. And he had a dream that it would always
be called the new College of Education. I can
recall him addressing the new department heads
when they formed the new departments and saying
that he hoped that always would be the new college
of education. We didn't want things to become
entrenched where people started building their
empires and would have nothing to do with the other
departments. Were there any specific political
or sociological things that might have impacted
the tremendous growth other than, of course, the
admittance of girls? And that was definitely one
of the largest. That was the biggest, I think. I
think as soon as they opened it up to the girls, it
just brought a totally different cultural look,
atmosphere. Everything was very, very positive.
Because it grew so fast, as a professor, Did you
feel that this had a definite change on the way you
were able to interact with students or work with
students? I didn't feel that way because they'd
always taken such great pride in being able to
interact with the students and holding the
student as an extremely important part of the
university. At least in our department and in the
college in general, I felt like they tried to
maintain that, but they would go the extra mile to
maintain that atmosphere. The mission of a land
grant institution is the triad of teaching,
research, and service. In your opinion, from your
point of view, perspective, has that changed in
the two eras with emphasis on one more so than
another? Only slightly. For example, in 1967, Dr.
Jerry Salek, who was also a graduate of Columbia
University, although I didn't know him at all
until we both arrived in August. Dr. Salek and I,
along with some personnel who were already here,
Lorene Robey, Dr. Lane Murray, Dr. Bill Graves,
and Dr. Roger Harrell, under leadership of Dr.
Paul Hensley, opened The education program in
1967 was a totally different way of looking at
teacher preparation. We implemented what was
called a block program. We had the students all
day, every day, five days a week for the first six
weeks. And we had all our methods, courses, and
educational psychology all being team or
cooperatively team taught. first six weeks, and
then the students went out and student taught all
day, every day, five days a week for the rest of the
semester. During that same semester, Jerry and I
brought in interaction analysis training and
micro-teaching training, which was very, very
new. In fact, no one, to our knowledge, was doing
any of that in the entire state of Texas. All they
were doing was talking about it. Stanford had a
program. The Far West Lab had done something. So it
was pretty innovative at that time. It's not now.
It's old hat. But in 1967, it was very innovative to
bring all of that together. Interaction
analysis, micro teaching, block program. And I
think that started to build a reputation across
the state. I heard Dean Hubert for probably the
next three years say over and over, when I go
traveling throughout the state, people keep
referencing the work that we're doing in the block
program interaction analysis and
micro-teachings. The word was spreading. Also, I
think another thing that had an impact was the
region service centers had been established.
When were those established? Do you know? I want to
say 66, 67.
But the key point there was that the Region Service
Center in Houston invited Texas A&M to take
$100,000 and develop the first training model
for... early childhood education preparation.
So we did. We spent that year developing a model and
field testing it. In the summer, we had people like
Mary Bassett. And we brought in some experts from
across the country to talk to that first group that
were the field test. And that became really the
first model. We sent that to the Texas Education
Agency.
It seemed to have a good impact, so it surprised
everyone that Texas A&M, which was so new to this
field, would be the ones to come up with the first
endorsement of a kindergarten certificate. So do
you think, does that mean then that actually A&M
was in the forefront from the beginning as a
college of education, not so much that it you know,
evolved from infancy to, I mean, in other words, it
came on pretty strong from the very beginning.
Yes, and I think that reputation, it took a long
time, you know, for people to recognize that. I
think now, you know, if you talk to people across
the state, I think they like what Texas A&M has done
as teacher. How about nationwide? Does it stand
still? No, we still, no, we suffer that same image
that we suffered back in 67. People just don't know
outside the state. They just don't know what Texas
A&M is.
Normally if you run into people who have never been
here or are not part of the Southwest Conference,
their first question is, where is that? So you're
not talking about the College of Education as
such, but just A&M in general? A&M in general, and
therefore we're caught up in, of course, the
College of Education. What about the emphasis on
research? I mean, of course, this was more major
service. It's been a subtle shift. In those days, I
think you would have called it more scholarly
productivity. What we were doing research-wise
would have been scholarly productivity. It's
only in recent years, probably the last three
years, that there's been this very subtle shift
to, although scholarly research is still done,
there's a shift to recognizing dollars, how much
money is coming in that can be earmarked as
grantsmanship money, which is the standard. type
of criterion that research universities have
used for years to measure their productivity. How
many dollars can you bring in from outside funds as
far as your research goes? Now, I have picked up
from other interviews that Dean Hubert's
emphasis was that you don't fill a college with
soft monies. Is that what you're referring to, the
grants that you need to have it? Hard money. You
need to have state support. Right. And the
university needs to provide that undergirding,
that foundation, if you're going to have a solid
program. So has that changed then now? Is there
more emphasis on the soft monies, or is it still
pretty? No, I think you still have to have that
basic foundation that Dean Huber talked about.
But I think with the new administration across the
whole university, there's more recognition
being given to outside funding supplementing or
complementing what you're doing. Because again,
see, that's how your ranking and ratings with your
peers across the country come about. And I think
the recent Carnegie labeling of universities and
colleges in the United States bears that out.
There are only two, level one. research
universities in the entire state of Texas, UT
Austin, Texas A&M. None of the others in the state
made that level one. In fact, they didn't make
level two. You have to drop to the third
classification before you start picking up
Houston, Tech, and the rest. Tell me about the
Center for Teaching Excellence and how that came
about, because I know that's your... Oh, about
1971, I started teaching the EDCI 601 college
teaching course. And I had a few teaching
assistants out of chemistry in that course. And
they kept going back and telling their
coordinator, who at that time was Dr. David
Brooks, who's now at the University of Nebraska,
about what we were doing in this course. And they
were saying everybody should have that. So Dave
Brooks talked to me, and I said, why don't we run a
one-week workshop for him? So we set up a workshop.
And I think Dave had about, let's say, 30 chemistry
TAs come in for a week. And to really recognize his
interest, he sat in with them. He attended every
session of that five-day workshop. By the time
Thursday came, they were saying, this is great, we
need to get Dean Kunze from the graduate college
over here. So Kunze did agree to come over that
Friday morning, and they hammered away at George
for about an hour about how great this was, and T.A.
should have this, and they ought to get
recognition for it, and so forth. So that was, to
me, the first thing that was going to lay the
groundwork for a center, because Kunze did
respond to that. He went to the academic policy
people, the deans and vice presidents. And the
very next year, they offered graduate assistants
teaching an extra $25 per month, stipend if they
took a special course that I then set up for the
teaching assistants. I closed it at 48. We had 48
enroll in that, which was a big... Was that the
first one? That was the first one. Well, then the
economic... What course, excuse me one second,
what course was that? What was it called? I want to
say it was called 678. Under what department? It
was in EDCI. ED? EDCI, Education and Criterion.
Yeah, right. Okay, EDCI and... I think it was
called 678. And it was a teaching of? I think it was
the analysis of college teaching. OK. I'll look
that up. But that course is defunct now. OK. And the
history of that is because during that first year
is when the economy fell out in the state. And they
didn't have that kind of money. And when you don't
have the money and the carrot, then you don't have
the enrollment. What was that year again, when you
had the 48 students? That must have been... I can
probably look
that up. I
think that was in 1972. Okay. If you have anything,
any documents or things that might contribute to
the demographics or the... I would be happy to make
copies and bring them back to you.
This will be interesting for me to look up again. At
your old book? Uh-huh.
So then there was no center at the time. It was just a
course. No, it was just a course. That's right,
just a course. And the center then did not actually
become... a center as such until what year? Let's
see, 1983, January 16, 1983. And where did the
funding come from? The initial funding came from
the development office, and that was the first
year. And then the second year, it came from the
Permanent University Fund, Available Fund from
the Permanent University Fund. And we have been on
those funds ever since.
How
many people on your staff? I have one full-time
secretary, and I have one full-time training
specialist, and I have one graduate assistant on
teaching, and one work study. Do you also still
teach? Yes. NADCI? NADCI. What courses? EDCI 601,
college teaching. EDCI 6...
No, it doesn't matter. It's the special topics
course. Okay, now, what is the primary function of
the center right now? Okay, I can give that to you.
Okay.
History and the functions. Thank you. OK. And I've
been getting some of the newsletters. Do you still
publish that? Yes. On a, let's see, is it how?
Monthly basis. A monthly basis. Just September
through May. And what kind of collaborative
effort do you have with other departments and
other colleges? Do you work very closely with?
What I use is a network. I have one representative
from each of the 10 academic colleges. So I do wear
two hats for the College of Education. The dean
just asked me to play both roles. And we meet a
couple of times a year just to coordinate and talk
about issues and directions. And I get ideas from
them. So anything that I do, I usually work through
the representative who stays in touch with his
college dean. For example, we give out $1,000
incentive grants to faculty members who want to do
something innovative in teaching. Those flow
through that representative. So they know what
their allocation is, and then if they have 10
applicants and only three $1,000 awards, they
narrow those 10 down to three. They send those over
to me, and I'm the last check on the proposal, and if
it's fine, good. I just transfer the money over to
their college. And then they're in charge of the
bookkeeping at the college, the dean's level, in
charge of the bookkeeping. When they're through,
they send the final report to me, which we file. Can
you tell me a little bit, perhaps over these many
years that you've been here, maybe either a
highlight or what you feel maybe has been your your
greatest contribution, or even an observation of
something that I might not find in these documents
that would be stringent? I would have to identify
the Center for Teaching Excellence
even more so than the four and a half years as head of
that new department of curriculum instruction.
Those were growth years and very critical years.
Because when the old Department of Education
closed, It had 1,800 majors. And when the new
college opened, our department had 1,800 majors,
which was beyond any projection that had been
laid. So we were short on graduate assistants. We
were short on faculty members. We were short on
resources. And those first half years were
critical building years. So you were the first
head of the EDCI. And what year was that when we got
organized? When
I stepped down, that's what they gave me. Well,
then it was the same year. In other words, did the
department open when the college opened? It was
part of the new college. Yes. The only departments
that existed at the time were the departments of
health and physical education, which was in the
arts and sciences, the department of ag
education, which is a liaison arrangement, the
department of industrial education, which was
with engineering, and the old department of
education. And they simply split the old
department of education into three new
departments. Oh, OK. EDCI, Ed Administration,
and Ed Psych. And the majors within education then
chose which of these five they were going to.
Health and PE, Industrial Ed, EDCI, Ed
Administration, or Ed Psych. And you ended up with
18? That's right. 1,800. And that was all there was
in the whole department before? College. Does
that mean that they all chose EDCI? No. What
happened is you had Again, a tremendous growth
factor so that you'd have to check, but I'll bet Ed
Psych probably opened to about 300 and Ed Aid to
probably about 300. But we opened to 1,800. And, of
course, it lost a number of faculty members to Ed
Psych and Ed Administration. So those were
formative years, but I would still say the center
has been my most exciting work. Because Dean
Hubert and I tried two different times from around
1972 till he stepped down to get a center
established. And there were always too many
priorities. The growth of the university was too
great, and they could not come up with the funding.
It was when Dean Corrigan came in and the
committees were formed that they finally could
catch their breath a little bit. And that's when
they formed the center.
Do you see anything in the near future or even the
more distant future that will impact the College
of Education? I know there's some really scary
things going on right now that people are very
apprehensive about besides the economy, just the
changes in education and the reforms. Oh, I see.
Sure. What do you perceive the future to be for the
college, like, say, from the year 2000 and beyond,
possibly? It all depends on the economy. Because
without the money, you just can't do it. Now, if the
resources are there, we may see some very dramatic
shifts. We may see more collaboration between the
university and the public school setting.
Although I think it's good now, I think there'll be
even more take place. I think you may see, in the
21st century, you may see more efforts to become
more technologically oriented, more
interactive television, more work with
microcomputers. But again, see, that's all tied
into the economy. If you don't have the money, you
can't move that direction. I think the last
estimate I saw to completely establish two
locations with interactive television ran about
close to $400,000, say, for two locations. Well,
that's a lot of money. Do you feel that the center,
though, in itself is pretty secure? I have no idea.
Does it come up year after year for refunding or how
does that work? It's a good question. I think all
centers and all non-line
item operations are always looked at annually in
light of the economics of the whole situation. For
example, when When you want to move in a certain
direction and you need the monies and you don't
have it from the state, then the only place you can
look is the available fund. And you have to look and
see what's in the available fund. And are there
places where you need to cut back in order to get
this new thrust? So in that light, everyone would
be vulnerable. Co-op, continuing ed, study
abroad, international programs, name any of the
programs that are operating out of available
funds. They can become vulnerable if a new thrust
comes. Very good. Is there anything that we
haven't covered that I had in the questions that
you might have wanted to discuss? What I'm looking
at in my paper is the Hubert era and the Corrigan era
and then of course a little bit of the interim under
Dr. Limbacher, I'm not going to do leadership
styles as such because that would be too involved.
Just more of the perceptions of the individuals
that were here because so many of them have been
here since the beginning. And a lot of it is
attributed to Dean Hubert's ability to tap the...
Yeah, I don't think the College of Education would
have moved as quickly if it hadn't been for Frank
Hubert. I think he knew the state. He knew the
politics of the state. He knew how to, quote,
grease the tracks so that this thing could become
operational in less than two years from the time it
was proposed, which is a remarkable feat. But it's
kind of like Earl Rudder. See, Earl Rudder's the
only one who could have made this a co-educational
university.
I think during the Hubert era, I would say the
thrust was internal within the state. The
concentration was to establish ourselves with
the agency, with the coordinating board, with the
people of the state of Texas. Under Corrigan, he
has continued with that thrust, but we have moved
into more of a national light with the Holmes study
and other efforts. And of course, Corrigan came.
from a national background and national
reputation. So it's a logical transition to move
from focus internally within the state to focus
more, retain that, but also start looking at your
image nationally. And I think that will pay
dividends eventually. Is it a very gradual? Oh, my
guess is a 10 to 15 year gap. In other words, if we
were doing 15 years from now exactly what we're
doing today, we would have far more recognition 15
years from now. It's that gap that's there before
people say, oh, Texas A&M is a college of
education, and recognize what it does. Do you feel
that there will always be a college of education?
I'm even picking up some comments like, well,
maybe there won't even be one, but I've never
really... I feel... Now, I have no evidence of
this, but I feel like places like Texas A&M and UT
Austin in particular need a college of education.
They're supposed to be the flagship
universities. They should be doing the best work
possible in all fields. And education is one of the
fields. So I think a college of education should do
this. And we'll survive, hopefully. Hopefully.
Even though there are going to be probably some
drastic changes, even in the teacher
preparation. Will that affect your center at all?
No. Center is a separate entity. It's the
university center for teaching excellence.
Right. Of course, directly to the office of
provost. It is not detached to any department or
college. Now, I have tremendous benefits being
attached to the College of Education because Dean
Corrigan and Bill Peters have recognized the
contribution of the Center. So I probably have
some benefits that others might not enjoy as much
because they've been very supportive. Dr.
Johnson, I really appreciate your time and your
effort and I think it's wonderful and I want to keep
on getting these newsletters.